TBA training: findings change policy.
The Bara Maternal Health Project (BMHP) assumed that the national efforts on the training of traditional birth attendants (TBAs) would be the most effective way of preventing women from dying in childbirth. Four months were spent asking women about their health problems and about the maternal and child health services available to them. Many of the women said their choice would be for home delivery with the help of a trained TBA. The BMHP findings seemed to support the assumption that primary health care programs should concentrate on training more TBAs. However, participants at the BMHP's workshop for district and regional medical and local governmental personnel agreed that such indispensable referral facilities were not available for TBAs. On average TBAs were assisting in only 18 deliveries each year. After an extensive three-month training program, few were taking on the expanded role in maternal and child health intended for them because they received little follow-up supervision from the health services. Without more support from health centers and small hospitals, the better quality services would never become available in Bara District. There were chronic shortages in essential drugs, equipment and trained staff as well as transport difficulties. The operational phase of the project has a strategy: upgrading rural dispensaries to manage some maternal complications and provide obstetric first aid before referral; educating the village health workers to identify high risk pregnancies, timely referral of obstetric emergencies and treatment for women with existing diseases; promoting family planning, and training of health workers. The project is now providing support for upgrading the maternity ward at the hospital, and rural dispensaries are supplied with equipment and materials essential for obstetric care. The Bara Maternal Health Project is one of three projects included in the Maternal and Child Health Improvement Program in Bara Province.
