Congress, administration, clergy and activists react to abortion clinic murders.
The murders of two abortion clinic workers in Brookline, Massachusetts, on December 30, 1994, have raised public awareness about the increasing violence against abortion clinics, their clients, and their employees. The US Justice Department immediately launched an investigation, while clinics have started to install metal detectors and bulletproof glass. Boston Archbishop Bernard Cardinal Law called for a moratorium on abortion protests in front of clinics in the wake of this incident and urged activists to take their vigils to churches to avoid any violence. In contrast, New York Archbishop John Cardinal O'Connor called for the protests to continue. The Brookline tragedy brings to five the number of abortion clinic workers killed in the previous 22 months, and it had prompted a national debate over inflammatory language inciting violence and whether mainstream anti-abortion groups are willing to assume the moral responsibility for such acts. To be sure at the annual anti-abortion march on Washington, DC, 45,000 protesters gathered peacefully, but they did not condemn violent tactics. After the March 1993 murder of Dr. David Gunn, President Clinton had established a task force to investigate these violent attacks and possible conspiracy implications. At the same time, the Attorney General pointed out that round-the-clock protection of all clinics would be prohibitively expensive for the US Marshall Service. In the House and Senate, measures were introduced calling for full enforcement of the Freedom of Access to Clinics Entrances Law (FACE). The Justice Department also brought several suits against anti-abortion protesters who blocked clinic entrances and stalked employees. All reproductive health clinics are grappling with these threats as well as the associated crisis of a decline in the number of physicians willing to provide abortion services. Medical education associations that set standards for residency programs are also under pressure whether to approve training in abortion for obstetric/gynecology residents.
