Regional differences and development models in China's urbanization.
China's economic development changed the urbanization pattern since 1953. By 1990 coast population comprised 49% of total population and urban inland population increased to 51%. Regional patterns of population distribution change were expressed as an Index of Differential Distribution. Urban growth followed three patterns: 1949 to 1965 and development in the inland areas; 1966 to 1975 and growth in the southern region; and 1976 to the present and development of coast regions. Population density was the greatest in the northeast (well known for established heavy industry) followed by the east. The northern area was the nation's political, economic, and cultural center. The east developed along the Yangtze River and Delta with Shanghai as its center. More urbanized areas had faster rates of growth. The imbalance of urbanization was charted by province; the imbalance of urbanization speed was also provided. Some of the findings showed imbalances between population and area in Guangdong, Shandong, Liaoning, Jiangsu, Zhejiang, and Hubei provinces (high density). The imbalance index for the nation was 1.0691 and the most urbanized provinces were Liaoning, Jilin, Heilongjiang, Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai, and Guangdong. Sparsely populated areas were provinces in the western region. The imbalance index for urbanization and economic development was 0.5973; most provinces clustered around the diagonal. Provinces with urbanization and GNP under 1% of the national total included Gansu, Qinghai, Ningxia, and Hainan; those whose GNP and urbanization was close to the national total included Guangdong, Sichuan, Shandong; urbanization was ahead of GNP the northeastern provinces of Liaoning, Jilin, and Heilongjiang. High GNP from rural township industries and low urbanization characterized Jiangsu, Shanghai, Zhejiang, Hebei, and Henan; some had a medium level of urbanization and urban population. The highest industrial output value provinces were Jiangsu, Shanghai, and Zhejiang. The largest agricultural output provinces were Henan, Sichuan, Hunan, Anhui, and Jiangsu with low population growth and Shandong, Heilongjiang, and Hubei with balanced urbanization and agricultural development. Output value in construction, transportation, and commerce provinces were Jiangsu, Shanghai, Guangdong, Beijing, and Zhejiang. The imbalance index was 0.6508 nationally.
