Postpartum care is crucial for health and survival.
Some of the serious side effects of childbirth are described for women in the critical postpartum period in developing countries. These side effects include hemorrhage, anemia, nutrition deficits, infection, family violence, and emotional problems. The postpartum period applies to 42 days after delivery, and it is a time when the healing and return of the reproductive organs to their nonpregnant state occurs. During this time, women should receive extra rest, food, and supplementation. In developing countries, maternal mortality primarily occurs during the puerperium. A study in Bangladesh found that 60% of women die during the postpartum period compared to 20% during pregnancy. Women tend to ignore their health problems in general, and, after the birth of a child, there is a tendency to focus on the newborn. A study in the UK revealed that 50% of women with children have longterm maternal health problems related to childbirth. Most postpartum complications are due to hemorrhage and infection. Normal blood loss after delivery is about 150 ml with a range of 300 ml for heavy loss and 500 ml for postpartum hemorrhage. An Australian study showed that 17% lose 500 ml of blood during delivery, and 4% lose more than 1000 ml. Excessive blood loss is directly related to a risk of anemia, and anemic women are at the highest risk of maternal mortality. The physical condition of women is the most significant feature in determining the seriousness of blood loss. A moderate level of blood loss with anemia is dangerous. Anemia leads to chronic fatigue and increased susceptibility to infection. Assuring high nutritional intake (iron and calcium fortified diets) during the postpartum period counteracts anemia and provides calories for adequate milk production. Adequate nutrition during the pregnancy means storage of nutrients for the postpartum period. Some cultures prescribe food restrictions which can impact deleteriously on women's health. Complications or prolonged delivery often lead to sepsis or infection. Infections may occur with improperly healing of tears. Violence against women can occur due to a stillbirth or failure to produce a male heir. Little is known about maternal stress and depression among postpartum women in developing countries.
