Millions of women lack maternity care.
Almost every birth in developed countries is attended by a trained person, but nearly half the births in developing countries get no such assistance. Nearly all pregnant women in developed countries receive prenatal care, but fewer than 6 in 10 receive it in the developing world. The updated World Health Organization (WHO) document Coverage of Maternity Care: A Tabulation of Available Information outlines the worldwide extent of trained attendance at birth, prenatal care, and delivery in a health institution. Currently in developing countries, 55% of births are attended by trained personnel, 37% take place in health institutions, and 59% of pregnant women receive prenatal care. In developed countries, the proportions are 99%, 95%, and 98%, respectively. In developing countries each year, almost 80 million babies are born at home and between 55 and 60 million infants are delivered with the help of only untrained traditional birth attendants or family members. Since 1989 the situation has improved in southeastern Asia and in southern, middle and northern Africa. But half a million women die from the complications of pregnancy each year and a further 15 million develop long-term disabilities, indicating that wider coverage of maternity care is crucial. More than 150 million women become pregnant each year, of these, at least 15% (23 million) develop serious complications that need skilled treatment. And 12.5 million pregnant women have diseases that are aggravated by pregnancy such as malaria, hepatitis, tuberculosis or diabetes. Every year 12.6 million children die before they reach their fifth birthday. About 3 million die in the first week of life, largely as a result of poorly managed pregnancies and/or deliveries. Some 3.6 million babies have moderate or severe birth asphyxia and 25 million have low birth weight of less than 2500 gm. WHO urges that all women receive appropriate prenatal care during pregnancy and delivery and in the first critical hours and days of life.
