A comparative study on the population urbanized under or outside state plan: different status of mobile urban population and permanent new urban residents in the urbanization of the Chinese population according to the Fourth Census in China.
The introduction of a market economy in China marked a turning point in the urbanization process in China by the coexistence of two types of populations, one urbanized under the planned economy or state plan (PUSP) and the other urbanized outside the state plan (POSP) or under the market economy. The 1990 census identified three types of mobile populations: 1) those with permanent residence elsewhere but who stay in one city for more than 1 year; 2) those away from their permanent residence for more than 1 year but staying in one city for less than 1 year; and 3) those whose residence is yet to be registered. Two anti-urbanization movements before the economic reform, the relocation of 30 million urban employees in the early 1960s and the resettlement of 40 million youths in rural areas in the mid-1960s, resulted in the drastic increase of the PUSP in the late 1970s and early 1980s as large numbers of these people returned. According to the State Statistical Bureau, 49.8% of the total population was urban in 1988; however, the 1990 census indicated only 26.2%. The inclusion of agricultural population living in suburbs was the reason for the differential. The mobile population can also be regarded as POSP, as the majority come from rural areas. Young people account for a greater proportion of POSP, while most PUSP are industrial or service employees, 30.46% with university and 9.47% with high school education. The reasons for moving to urban areas include 1) joining relatives, 2) study 3) employment and 4) government appropriation of land. The POSP are supported by the state in resettlement. In contrast, the mobile population faces discrimination (fines, eviction) and employment, education, and health care problems. Among the PUSP, the fertility rate was lower than the urban average, as showed by a survey conducted in 74 cities in 1987. The fertility of POSP was higher because some have more children for security, since they are excluded from the benefits accorded to officially registered residents.
