Global measles strategy picks up pace.
The need to improve measles control was discussed at the Informal Consultation on Strategies to Accelerate Global Measles Control, held April 27-28, 1994, at Pan American Health Organization headquarters in Washington, D.C., by the Global Program for Vaccines of the World Health Organization. The main conclusions were: 45 million cases of measles occur each year, and 1-2 million of them die. The situation in early 1994 suggests that current measles control strategies will not attain the global case reduction goals set by the World Summit for Children and the World Health Assembly. In 1993 global measles vaccination coverage was 78%. However, to improve measles control in developing countries, the implementation of existing vaccine delivery strategies needs to be improved. These include delivery by fixed clinic-based services and immunization for populations away from health centers by mobile teams. Additional strategies must increase measles vaccination coverage, particularly by vaccinating high-risk groups. These include areas with high population density, those in the lowest 25% in the national ranking of measles immunization coverage, areas with a history of high numbers of measles cases and/or measles deaths, urban areas with poor socioeconomic status, and areas with vitamin A deficiency. High-risk groups may include children who are admitted to hospital, the malnourished, refugees living in camps, migrants, and ethnic and religious groups. A major impediment in many countries is the lack of political commitment. Latin American countries undergoing civil unrest have several times successfully instituted "corridors of peace," cease-fires declared for the specific purpose of immunizing all children in the conflict area, regardless of allegiance. Additional limiting factors include a lack of funds to purchase measles vaccines and syringes and the limited health infrastructure in some key countries. Success in measles control will occur as countries and partners develop technically feasible, logistically practical, and affordable implementation strategies.
