ICPD PrepCom III: the discussions - the results.
The Third Preparatory Committee (PrepCom III), which took place at the UN in New York April 4-22, 1994, was convened to discuss the Program of Action for the September International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD) in Cairo and ended by approving the draft Program of Action. The third session broadened the concept of family planning, by including it as part of reproductive health care for both men and women. The notion of population in development policy was boosted as was the critical role played by women in reproductive health, population, and development programs. As a result, the chapter on gender equity, equality and empowerment was strengthened. However, there were still some definitions that lacked consensus. A few delegations led by the Holy See did not accept the terms reproductive health, fertility regulation, family planning, or safe motherhood, for they felt that these terms could include abortion on demand. 53 family planning association (FPA) representatives attended PrepCom III, and 26 of them were members of their government delegations. The International Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF) submitted a report, Understanding Adolescents, which highlighted the need for greater commitment to the sexual and reproductive health needs of the world's youth. Another report, Planned Parenthood Challenges: Unmet Needs, examines the unmet needs of the marginalized in society and emphasizes quality, acceptability, and accessibility of services. Both documents were well received by the media and delegates, who saw them as important contributions to the ICPD discussions. Throughout the 3-week meeting, IPPF and member FPAs organized a number of workshops designed to share information and exchange ideas. IPPF held workshops on gender and on Reproductive Health and Reproductive Rights and Family Planning in Low Fertility Societies (IPPF-Europe Region). IPPF was also a partner in workshops on communications, post-abortion care, safe abortion, adolescent sexuality, and male involvement.
