The Emory University / Grady Memorial Hospital program: Postponing Sexual Involvement.
The Postponing Sexual Involvement program of Emory University's Grady Memorial Hospital began as a teen pregnancy prevention program in the early 1970s. Initially Atlanta public schools devoted 5 classroom periods to discussion of sexuality and decision making. Evaluation results indicated that adolescent sexual behavior change was not occurring, so program staff added the Postponing Sexual Involvement component in 1983. This abstinence program was based on the theory that social influence is related to the likelihood of becoming sexually involved, and not lack of knowledge. Specific age groups are targeted, so that attitudes and skills can be promoted until the maturity of handling sexuality is reached. The assumption is that teenagers are not mature enough to understand the implications of their actions and to deal with consequences. Adolescents are encouraged to explore feelings about sexual involvement and to envision how their future can be affected by such behavior. Human sexuality information, including contraception is still provided for 5 periods, with and additional 5 periods on postponing sexual involvement. 4000 8th graders in Atlanta receive this instructional program. The significant feature of the program is the coexistence of the messages that adolescents ought not to get involved sexually at an early age, and that, if sexual involvement does occur, they should use appropriate contraception. A unique feature is the teaching conducted by trained 11th and 12th grade students as teen leaders in presenting information, conducting discussions, teaching assertiveness skills, and providing a forum for practicing handling problem situations. The youth models are important for dispelling the myth that "everybody's doing it." Teen leaders received about 20 hours of training in how to guide discussions about handling social and peer pressures. Structured and guided exercises were conducted for practicing skills in resisting peer pressure. The program evaluation included a high risk population of 536 low income minorities. 395 were in the 24 schools receiving the outreach program and 141 from 29 other local schools. Results indicated that 25% had already has sexual experience. 95% of those without experience found the program to be personally helpful in resisting pressure. The behavior impact was greater on girls than boys; 39% of 9th grade boys who had been in the program began sexual involvement compared to 61% of boys not in the program.
