The effect of population growth in China in the course of economic growth.
The interaction of population and economic growth in China was analyzed between 1953 and 1989. The principle index for population-economic growth was differential per capita income, or income exceeding the basic minimum standard of living. Population growth occurred when per capita income was higher than the standard up to a threshold level, after which population declined. Rapid population growth decreased differential per capital income. Differential per capita income was considered the better measure of the interaction between economic conditions and population growth. Time-series differential per capita income measures were provided annually. Differential income per capita was accounted for by differential per capita investment, marginal productiveness of differential per capital investment, and labor force input on differential per capita income. Measures accounted for a constant tariff and labor productivity. The results showed the depletion effect on national income from increased population growth. Prior to 1978, the economic depletion in China was due to the impact of the marginal population and, after 1978, the depletion was due to increased consumption. Income increased from 2.53 yuan in 1953 to 8.64 in 1989; the average annual growth of the per capita consumption level increased from 2.1% between 1966 and 1973 to 8.7% by 1989. The depletion intensity of population growth on differential per capita income varied with population growth rates; it tended to fall over time, but differential per capita income would not be reduced to zero or a "low level income trough." The blockage of economic growth from population growth was evidenced in 13 specific years. The average coefficient between 1953 and 1989 was 0.58, which indicated that the blockage effect from population growth was less than the impetus effect of economic growth, but still high enough to offset rapid economic growth. Graphing the interaction between differential income growth and population growth showed strong correspondence between the rise in one factor and the decline in the other.
