Lao PDR. Ministry of Education and Sports to offer population education.
A mission (November 7-11, 1993) to Lao PDR by the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) CST adviser on Population Education resulted in an outline of a pilot project that integrates population education into primary and secondary schools and into non-formal education programs. A Population Education Unit, which will be established in the General Education Department with the active participation of the Department of Teacher's Training, the Teacher Development Centre, the Pedagogical Institute, the Research Institute of Educational Sciences, and the Department of Non-formal Education, will execute the project. Population education concepts will be integrated as separate units in social sciences and biology in grades 6-11 and as part of "The World Around Us" in grades 4-5. In non-formal programs, the concepts will be integrated into basic literacy, skills development, health and family life education, and civic education. Messages will include population policies, population theories, demography, birth spacing and family life education, population and economic development, and population and quality of life aspects (health, food and nutrition, education, housing, employment, resources and environment, gender roles and responsibilities, values and beliefs, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, adolescent fertility, and areas of concern to target audiences). The Research Institute of Educational Services, the Non-formal Education Department, and the Pedagogical Institute will develop instructional and training materials, curricula, and guides. The draft materials will be tested in 2 primary schools, 2 lower secondary schools, and 1 adult education center. The shortage of staff, nationally and institutionally, trained in substantive and methodological aspects of population education, will be remedied by short-term attachment, training courses, and study visits abroad. A Documentation Centre will provide information to project personnel, including action research and evaluation studies to ensure qualitative improvements in the project.
