Family planning, STD services fare well under Kennedy health reform proposal. But abortion debate yet to come.
The US Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee has advanced a health care reform plan that includes stronger and more complete coverage of reproductive health care than any other major proposal. It is likely to spark debates over coverage of abortion services, however. The Labor and Human Resources' health care reform plan (the Kennedy plan) expands the definition of family planning services to include counseling and education and coverage of contraceptive drugs and devices. The lack of specificity of coverage of prescription drugs in the Clinton plan worried reproductive health advocates. The Kennedy plan addresses contraceptive drugs and devices under the category family planning services, which, in essence, does not make them subject to the separate deductible. It also exempts all family planning services from any deductibles or copayments. The Kennedy plan refers to sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) rather than calling them fertility related infectious illnesses as the Clinton plan does. The Kennedy plan would include syphilis. Both plans cover annual exams for women at risk of STDs. The Kennedy plan covers pap smears or pelvic exam every two years, while the interval of the Clinton plan is three years. No one challenged any of the above provisions during the first round of committee markups. There is likely to be no challenges after the 1994 Memorial Day recess. One was surprised that no challenges materialized over the provision for school-related health education and services. The committee approved this provision by a vote of 17-0. Even the antiabortion supporter did not object to it. The major challenge awaiting the committee after the Memorial Day recess is abortion. The Kennedy plan does not specifically include abortion but is intimated under the category of services for pregnant women. Antiabortion amendments are expected. It is unlikely this committee or any other committee will reach a consensus over the overall shape of a reform plan.
