[Physicians denounce precariousness of reproductive health in the country and propose an addendum to the Brazilian document for the Cairo conference].
On June 21, 1994, in Sao Paulo, a meeting took place of reproductive health professionals: service providers, university professors, representatives of nongovernmental organizations, secretaries of health of states and municipalities. They issued a manifesto on reproductive health in Brazil. In view of the preparations for the 3rd International Conference on Population and Development to take place in Cairo in September, 1994, it is hoped that these points will be incorporated into the official platform and in government action plans. Reproductive health is a basic human right. The growth of population decreased in Brazil in the 1980s, yet assistance in the area of reproductive health is still insufficient and unsatisfactory. The population decrease did not result in the improvement of health care and family planning. Maternal morbidity and mortality rates are still high in Brazil, especially in the north-northeastern regions, where it is 10 times higher than the national rate. There are 5 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births in Canada, 8 in the US, and 140 in Brazil. 90% of these deaths could be avoided by routine reproductive health measures. Important causes of infant mortality in Brazil are malnutrition and infectious diseases, which could be prevented by lifting the low socioeconomic level and through vaccination and birth spacing. Although fertility has been on the decline, the fertility of 10-19 year old adolescents has increased significantly, leading to high mortality rates for their infants. An estimated 1.4 million abortions occur per year in Brazil with frequent complications because of its illegal, clandestine nature. It is also estimated that 6-8 million women have been sterilized, which is the primary means of family planning because of the lack of other contraceptive options. The combination of cesarean-tubal ligation operations has been institutionalized in health services, which creates major distortions in the delivery of health care. Sexually transmitted diseases are on the rise, and HIV infections are contracted mainly from sexual intercourse and IV drug abuse. Furthermore, it is absolutely necessary for men to participate in family planning education in order to raise the status of women.
