Worlds apart 3: Botswana and Zambia. Secrets of success in southern Africa.
Botswana must close the gap between knowledge and practice if population growth is to be decreased. Community-based efforts have been partially successful, but obstacles are posed by cultural attitudes, misinformation and fear, teenage mistrust of family planning (FP) clinics, and slow FP service due to skilled labor shortages. The growth rate has declined from 3.5 in 1980 to 2.8, but population may still increase from 1.3 million in 1991 to 2.3 million by 2011. About 60% of the population is aged under 30 years. The increased population is expected to strain resources for social services, exacerbate employment absorption, and contribute to environmental degradation. Although fertility was still very high at 5.0 in 1991, the total fertility rate 10 years ago was 7.1. In 1988, 90% of women knew of a modern method, and contraceptive usage of a modern method increased to 33%. The government aimed to increase contraceptive prevalence to 40% between 1991 and 1997. Botswana, compared to the same-sized Zambia, has been able to rapidly reduce its fertility with only 33% of Zambia's arable land and lesser urbanization. The difference in these two countries may be in Botswana's work force, 33% of which is made up of women, and in the high female school enrollment. Government officials acted without an official population policy before voluntary FP associations were involved to encourage parents to space their children and use modern methods. The integration of maternal and child health and FP was responsible for much of the fertility decline. Family life education was initiated in school curriculums in the early 1980s. Male contraceptive use and parent education in communication with youth have received the attention of nongovernmental groups. 86% of the population lives within 15 km of a health center, and 73% lives within 8 km. Improvements are still needed in training health service staff to be sensitive to client concerns and to shorten waiting times. In 1987, the government approved dispensing of contraceptives to adolescents, who still fear clinics and reprisal from parents discovering their sexual activity or their contraceptive use.
