Dispelling OC myths and misperceptions.
The 1993 Gallup Survey (in a follow-up to its 1985 survey) shows a reduction in the number of women who believed oral contraceptives (OCs) were associated with substantial risks (76-54%, 1985-1993). Highly educated women were just as likely to associate OCs with substantial risks as less educated women. Current OC users were less likely to associate OCs with substantial risks than were users of other methods (34% vs. 56%). The main perceived substantial risk was cancer. Women still believed that OC use was as risky as childbirth (65% and 64%). Just 6% knew that OCs protect against some cancers. 42% thought that OCs provide no noncontraceptive health benefits. More women in 1993 than in 1985 incorrectly believed that the OCs' failure rate was at least 10% (41% vs. 31%). The actual failure rate is between 3% and 8.3%. In the 1991 Yale Health Services Study, 49% of women associated OCs with substantial risks. Yet, 84% believed that OCs did provide substantial benefits. 75-80% of women did not know the major noncontraceptive health benefits of OCs. The leading perceived risk of OC use was cancer. The mass media focusing on side effects of OCs and former high-dose OC users and some health professionals may have handed down their misperceptions to today's potential users. The US Food and Drug Administration still requires labels to have data not relevant to the low-dose OCs. Study results are unclear about OCs' effect on the risk of breast cancer. OCs do decrease the risk of ovarian and endometrial cancers. OCs protect against pelvic inflammatory disease, ectopic pregnancy, iron deficiency anemia, and benign breast disease. The current low-dose OCs appear to have little to no adverse effect on the risk of developing hypertension, clotting problems, myocardial infarction, and stroke. OC users should not smoke because smoking does increase the risk of developing these vascular diseases. The findings of these 2 studies reflect the need for clinicians to assure patients that low-dose OCs are effective and safe.
