"Intermediate" population control and comprehensive community development.
China's fertility rapidly declined since the 1970s. Family planning efforts and rigorous population control were recognized as having a significant influence on the 50% decline in fertility to 2.25 in 1990. Little attention was given to intermediate level research on the determinants of fertility decline. The intermediate level is the community, which is a suitable level for analysis of Chinese fertility because income is relatively homogenous at the community level. Communities have common economic interests, and multiple births by one member encroaches on the resources of other members. Community social organization links the micro with the macro birth control of national government. Cultural values shape reproductive patterns in communities. A determinant of population control is the general level of development in the community. Several models of development are apparent: the traditional agricultural topology, the modern industrial structure topology, and the transitional industrial structure topology. Communities may vary in size from small, to medium, to large. Family planning core households can be effective in educating adjacent households and responding flexibly. The medium community has close spatial connections between population management and local economy and culture. A large community corresponds to a township in rural areas and neighborhood in urban areas. Historical period influences reflect the level and structure of social economic development. In the Hainan community with population of 6.5 million, there are still backward economic conditions and a high birth rate. An experimental zone development group was established in 1991 to enhance population and economic development in five agricultural communities. Within 2 years, progress had been made in market reform and communities were modeled on "little government and big societies." The experimental program expanded knowledge about population issues, promoted education and training, and secured employment positions for educated workers.
