"I am a healthy Indonesian child". 1,000 primary schools in Jakarta join in the School Health Program.
Parasitic infections cause significant child morbidity and mortality in often overcrowded and unsanitary neighborhoods across Jakarta. In the interest of controlling such infections, Yayasan Kusuma Buana (YKB), an independent nongovernmental organization (NGO) which has brought family planning and maternal and child health care to many of the urban poor in Indonesia, launched a school-based parasite control program in Jakarta in 1987. The program is coordinated by representatives from the Department of Health, the National Family Planning Coordinating Board, the Department of Education and Culture, the National Coordinating for Parasite Control, the Indonesian Planned Parenthood Association, and YKB. Stool samples are taken and analyzed twice annually from 250,000 students in 1000 schools. Children found to be infected are subsequently treated for parasites. All children, teachers, and families receive education on the range of potential parasites and ways in which recurrent infection may be prevented. Parents pay Rp1000/year/enrolled child to receive this comprehensive service of examination, diagnosis, and treatment. Although the program was only 71.8% self-sufficient in 1992, it has come a long way from the 13.2% level of 1987. In sheer numbers of clients served, the program has grown to present levels from sampling an initial 9500 students in 34 schools. Despite only small reductions in the prevalence of parasitic infections in North Jakarta, fluctuations in the number of students participating depending on the time of year, and the failure of some youths to change their behavior to prevent reinfection, this program has proved successful. In particular, it demonstrates that many lower-middle class people are willing to pay for affordable services; NGO-provided school health programs can improve parent and child health; fee-for-service programs can be sustained if properly managed; and that school health programs are good entry points to developing good community ties. YKB plans to soon offer cervical cancer screenings and tuberculosis examinations in a mobile health van.
