Role of sonography in placenta previa.
To assess the role of sonography in placenta previa (PP), a study was undertaken at Government Medical College, Patiala, India, on 100 women at more than 28-weeks' gestation. Only those cases where placental site was confirmed at caesarean section (94), or on manual removal of placenta (6), were analyzed. The study group comprised 50 cases of clinically suspected PP presenting with antepartum hemorrhage (APH); 50 non-bleeding cases served as control. Detailed clinical examination was done and the patient underwent an ultrasonographic examination with sonoline SL2 real time B-mode scanner using a 3.5 Mhz abdominal transducer. In 12 cases who had reported before 34 weeks pregnancy, a serial sonography was done fortnightly (3 readings) till delivery to observe placental migration, if any. In the study group, sonography revealed PP in only 27 cases (54%) and in the rest APH was attributed to other causes. The mean age was higher in the study group (A) as compared to control group (B), but the difference in was not statistically significant. Sonographic diagnosis of PP was correct in all cases: however in 2 cases it had underestimated the degree of PP (96% accuracy). Women with higher parity had more PP compared to primipara. On analyzing clinical, sonographic and operative findings, all of group A (50 cases) were clinically suspected of PP, while none of group B (50 controls) were suggestive of PP. Surprisingly, 6 cases of asymptomatic placenta previa were picked up by the ultrasound. In the control group 6 cases of placenta previa detected by sonography were previae, but there was an additional case of complete previa which was entirely missed by ultrasonography. The sensitivity and specificity of ultrasound in detecting placenta previa was 96.8% and 98.5%, respectively. Thus, sonography is a highly sensitive diagnostic tool in PP and may be life-saving both for the mother and fetus when it detects PP in asymptomatic nonbleeding cases.
