Technology for health.
In 1991, the Technology Development and Transfer (TDT) Division of the South African Medical Research Council (MRC) formulated and implemented its Vitalink program, which responds to the perceived technological needs of the health care and industrial environments. In 1993, TDT was restructured as the Health Technology Research Group (HTRG), which maintains Vitalink's mission to make sure that health care technology is appropriate, cost effective, efficacious, efficient, and safe. HTRG aims to provide assistance to other Sub-Saharan African countries. Its long term goals include assurance of proper linking of subprocesses of health care technology (i.e., assessment, research and development, design, manufacturing, evaluation and certification, procurement, support, and utilization) and of a defined and entrenched health care technology assessment process and promotion of the development of the needed human resources and skills to create and use health care technology. Sub-Saharan Africa needs a special category of technical support referred to collectively as health care engineering (hospital, clinical, and biomedical engineering). HTRG focuses on health technology management, physical technologies, and biotechnology and pharmaceutics. The Health Technology Management Programme has a technology assessment model tailored to southern Africa, which could help decision makers with health administration, health insurance, hospital management, and industry issues. It hosts health care technology management seminars and a regional workshop. The Biotechnology and Pharmaceutical Programme has developed the Glaxo Action TB Initiative, which identifies new targets for antituberculosis drugs and vaccines and manages various collaborative projects. The Physical Technologies Programme serves as a liaison between MRC and business development. It has been involved in the transfer of low cost monitoring and diagnostic systems (e.g., lung function evaluation systems) to the health sector.
