In the states.
In Minnesota, the Hennepin County Medical Center will be the second State hospital to offer abortions and the eighth provider of the service. Approximately 25 residents from the University of Minnesota will receive abortion training at the Center each year. In legislative action taken during January and February 1994, an Alabama Judiciary Committee supported the requirement that a parent giving consent for a daughter's abortion present a picture identification and the patient's birth certificate. Other states considering parental notification rules are Iowa, Kansas, Oklahoma, and Virginia. In Arizona, a legislative committee approved a bill requiring one-parent notification 48 hours before a minor's abortion and approved requirement of a notice to be posted in abortion clinics warning that termination of a first pregnancy increases the risk of breast cancer. Committees in Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, and Kansas considered ways to limit the number of children born in families receiving Aid to Families with Dependent Children either by limiting benefits at a 2-child level or by providing financial incentives to mothers who accept the use of a long-acting contraceptive. Committees considered changes in state funding in Missouri (to allow abortion funding in cases of medical necessity, rape, or incest), New Mexico (a prohibition of the use of state funds for most abortions was tabled), and Utah (to allow state funding in cases of rape or incest). In Hawaii, a ban on most post-20-week abortions died. This bill would also have required biased counseling and a physician-reporting requirement. Indiana rejected a prohibition against blocking abortion clinics and mandatory 24-hour delay and biased counseling requirements. In Utah, a committee is considering prohibiting the delivery of mandatory information via the telephone and requiring that abortion-seekers be offered an ultrasound prior to the procedure. California is seeking to criminalize participation in an organization whose members engage in terrorist activities such as stalking. Connecticut, on the other hand, as a response to the Supreme Court ruling in NOW vs. Scheidler which held that the anti-racketeering statutes used against abortion protesters blocking clinics do not have to prove a financial gain motive, is considering amending its anti-racketeering law to require an economic motive. Nebraska wants to prohibit obstruction of abortion clinics or approaching a person within 8 feet without their consent. This state is also considering including the use of a controlled substance while pregnant under its definition of child abuse or neglect. Missouri committees are considering action to prohibit the use of physician's offices for abortions at 14-18 weeks gestation and to require that all post-18 week abortions take place in a hospital. This state is also considering requiring abortion providers to purchase  500,000 in malpractice insurance and to follow a reporting procedure. Abortion-seekers in Missouri would have a 24-hour delay and would be provided with state-approved materials about abortion.
