Kenyan women adult literacy learners: why their motivation is difficult to sustain.
Kenya, like other Third World countries, has illiteracy rates for women which are twice those of men (in 1978, 35% of males and 70% of females aged 15 and above were illiterate). Since the beginning of the country's literacy campaign in 1979, women have comprised more than 70% of attendees. While this situation remains the case, the overall enrolment figures for the program have shown a gradual decline from 1979 to 1990 due to a lack of emphasis on individual motivation. Women dominate the literacy programs for several reasons: 1) women historically had less access to formal education than men; 2) the changing economy has forced women to assume extra responsibilities outside the home which make the women want to acquire formal skills; 3) women's schedules are often flexible enough to allow them to attend classes; 4) literacy classes provide women with needed socialization opportunities; and 5) in some communities cultural norms prevent men from attending classes with women. Women also have many obstacles which make their desire to become adult learners difficult to sustain. They have responsibilities which range from child-bearing to management of their family farms which leave them little time for study or class attendance. There is also little encouragement offered the women either at home or in their classes. At home they are confronted with a myriad of demands on their time. Their classes take place in conditions which are not very conducive to learning (classrooms designed for children or open air centers). The literacy teachers are, for the most part, unqualified. They must meet only minimal requirements and receive no training. The women also have less opportunities to practice their new skills outside of the classroom. Women have less time then men to read, and they are less fluent then men in English and Kiswahili, the 2 official languages of Kenya. Because Kenyan society is male-dominated, there is little encouragement given to women who attempt to acquire literacy. Also, men tend to dominate the position of authority in the literary programs and also make up 66% of the cadre of full-time teachers, giving the women few role models and fewer opportunities to work with an instructor who would be particularly sensitive to their needs. Since there is a demonstrated positive correlation between formal education and better health practices and agricultural productivity, there is a real need to attract more women to the literacy program and to motivate them to remain in the program. The best way to accomplish this would be to improve the status of women in Kenyan society. Until this occurs, however, measures can be taken to increase the number of women in administrative and teaching positions and to improve the quality of teachers through training and proper remuneration. The literacy program itself can be used to improve the status of women in society.
