Community development and change of fertility rate: comments on the research concerning the investigation of the world's fertility rate.
Community research focuses on how the social, economic, and geographic environments influence individual childbearing behavior. Community variables could be global institutional measures, contextual, or descriptive. Casterline et al. in "The Collection and Analysis of Community Data" (1985) reviewed, analyzed, and established a framework for examination of the links between community and the fertility rate. The cross national comparisons yielded inconsistent results by country. The conclusion was that the independent characteristics of community had a weaker effect on fertility than individual characteristics. The framework was still accepted by demographers. Recommendations, which compensated for the disappointing results, were made to address in sample surveys a longer time period and to use anthropological methodology. Suggestions were made to establish a rigorous theoretical model, which eliminated the duplicity of and limited the total number of community factors. Community features in prior research were selected that were superficial and did not represent cultural differences. Core cultural features of community may include common value systems, social structure, and codes of conduct. The theoretical model should be based on detailed and careful case studies. There was also difficulty with the definition of community, which affected data collection and analysis. Analysis was deficient when based on indicators of development or modernization, which were too simplified and not easily linked with the culture and system of a community. Chinese research on county or village level survey data is in its infancy. Research would be strengthened with regional analysis (South, Central, and Western), careful screening of community variables, selection of measures of resources at a community's disposal, identification of closeness of the community and community attitudes, and disentangling the links between macro and micro factors.
