Birth control update for childbirth educators.
Since the last in a series of childbirth education classes discusses contraception, educators must know about various family planning methods. Oral contraceptives (OCs) comprise combined OCs, phasic OCs, and minipills. Combined OCs inhibit secretion of gonadotropin-releasing hormone, which in turn keeps the follicle-stimulating hormone from inducing the ovarian follicle to grow and keeps luteinizing hormones from activating ovulation. They also thicken cervical mucus. Minipills also thicken cervical mucus and render the endometrium unreceptive to fertilized egg implantation. They do not always inhibit ovulation, however. OCs can induce side effects, such as nausea, hypertension, increased risk of atherosclerosis, and fatigue. The IUD prevents pregnancy either by inhibiting implantation of a fertilized egg or by an inflammatory reaction of the endometrium resulting in a release of macrophages which may destroy sperm. The no-longer-produced Dalkon Shield IUD increased the risk of pelvic inflammatory disease and damaged the reputation of other IUDs. Rare IUD complications are uterine perforation, salpingitis, tubal scarring, pelvic inflammatory disease, and infertility. Diaphragms, cervical film, and condoms serve as barriers between the egg and sperm. The main problem with barrier methods is the increased risk of developing toxic shock syndrome. Spermicide increase the effectiveness of diaphragms, cervical caps, and condoms. Vasectomy keeps sperm from arriving at storage sites. Shortterm side effects are swelling, discomfort, and occasional rejoining of the cut ends of the vas. Research hints at a link between vasectomy and prostate cancer. Some complications of tubal ligation are urinary tract infections, accidental electrical burns, and pelvic infections. Natural family planning methods include withdrawal, the rhythm method, and the sypto-thermal method. Controversial injectable contraceptives are Depo-Provera (medroxyprogesterone acetate) and Noristerate (norethisterone enanthate).
