Worlds apart 3: Botswana and Zambia. Zambian women's needs not being met.
Zambia has not been as successful as neighboring Botswana in reducing fertility. Zambian fertility only declined from 7.1 to 6.5 between 1972 and 1992. Only 15% use modern contraception, even though 87% have knowledge of modern contraception and a source of supply. A major obstacle to fertility decline is the lack of government endorsement of family planning (FP), even though the Planned Parenthood Association of Zambia has promoted FP since 1972. Contraception was feared and perceived as the persecution of Black Africans by White colonists. State hospitals did not begin accepting FP until the late 1970s, and foreign aid was directed to maternal and child health services. In 1989, a national population policy was adopted, and goals were set to attain 30% contraceptive prevalence by the year 2000. Health services lacked trained personnel to provide FP services. Teenagers were particularly unaware of contraception in a country where, in 1992, 66% of women were either mothers or pregnant by the age of 19 years. Unmet need was estimated at 33% of women who desired a delay in childbearing or no more children. Service accessibility was an obstacle, since many remote areas were 20-25 km from a health center. Other obstacles to good health were contaminated water supplies, lack of hygienic practices, and air pollution. 71% of the population lived in absolute poverty in 1990. Overcrowding in urban areas and lack of educational facilities contributed to the lack of social development. The tropical climate and shortages of arable land coupled with high fertility resulted in a difficult existence. Cultural support for a large family was still strong. Donor and government support is currently directed to contraceptive logistics, communications, contraceptive social marketing, community- and employment-based distribution, operations research, and safe abortions, which are legal but cumbersome because of bureaucratic procedures and the lack of an informed population.
