The Teen Primary Pregnancy Prevention Program of the Children's Aid Society.
The Teen Primary Pregnancy Prevention Program of the Children's Aid Society (CAS) in New York City was briefly reviewed. The primary components of the program emphasized not only the biological and physical aspects of sex and contraception but also education about life options and how to take advantage of them. The program includes on-site primary health services, self-esteem enhancement, skills training in individual sports for enhancement of self discipline and self control, academic assessment and homework assistance, family life and sex education, job and career awareness, and individual counseling. The program provides upon completion of high school, automatic admission to Hunter College of the City University of New York, opportunity for scholarships to cover costs of books and transportation, a guarantee of a job, requirements for maintaining a savings account for some of their earnings, medical care, and trained counselors. There have been no controlled group evaluations of the program. Over the past 5 years of operation, 8 teens became pregnant and 2 males caused a pregnancy. All teens in the program are now in their junior and senior high school years. In 1994, there were 75 students who went to Hunter College. Replication of the program is ongoing in 10 local New York City agencies and in 10 cities outside New York. One concern is the high per pupil cost, which is  1500 annually, and the high labor intensity. The annual operating budget was  415,000 in 1993. The program began with 22 teenagers and 12 parents in 1985, and currently serves 200 students and 75 parents at 3 locations. Donor support comes from the CAS and other sources. The founder and director is Michael A. Carrera, PhD, a professor of health sciences at Hunter College. The operating program philosophy is that the multidimensional community based inputs are similar to the supports one should receive from family. This program takes advantage of Dr. Carrera's experience and understanding that most programs fall because they are based on the wrong assumption that information and knowledge will head off the problem. A key component is the continuance, from as Young as 10 years until independence,s in a consistent and supportive environment. Education is about training young people in how to avoid unintended pregnancy, to make responsible sexual decisions, and to feel valued.
