Women's demands and demographic goals.
When the international family planning (FP) movement was launched, its goal was to improve the well-being of individuals, particularly of women. During the past 3 decades, governments have begun to take an active interest in FP programs because of concerns about the negative impact of high growth rates on development efforts. The potential for conflict between individual and government interests was heightened by the widespread assumption that it would be difficult to convince people to limit their fertility. However, data from the World Fertility Survey and the Demographic and Health Surveys have shown that a high level of unwanted fertility exists in most developing countries. This level of expressed need has been high, persistent, and a good predictor of subsequent contraceptive usage and emerging fertility patterns. These data will possibly reduce the conflict between people who place a high priority on world population stabilization and those who consider population policies to be a threat to human rights. By increasing investments in better quality FP programs whose sole objective is to help individuals and couples meet their own family size ideals, developing countries will meet their demographic goals. Of the 21 countries which have adopted quantitative demographic targets, for example, 17 have survey data which measures unmet demand for FP. In 13 of these, meeting the existing demand for fertility control will result in a higher contraceptive use rate than necessary to meet national goals. Alone among the other 4, Thailand has reached a saturation point for expanded contraceptive services. Modern contraceptives are not yet broadly available in Haiti, Nigeria, or Ghana (thus, it is difficult to assess actual levels of need). These findings imply that whereas countries should indeed set longterm demographic targets, they should evaluate the success of their programs by how well FP services meet the goals of individuals and couples. This will require modifications in the organization of FP programs, particularly in the relationships between supervisors and field workers and in the attitudes of service providers to their clients. These efforts should be augmented by other development strategies to improve living standards.
