A thousand tears...a thousand smiles: a celebration worth remembering.
In 1994 the world is celebrating the 25th anniversary of a simple treatment known as oral rehydration solution (ORS), which now saves a million lives each year. The International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh (ICDDR,B) organized events to commemorate this anniversary. There was also a commemoration in Washington, DC, USA, in March, 1994. The events began on February 5, 1994. In the morning, the Executive Director of UNICEF visited the ICDDR,B hospital in Dhaka. The British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) covered the visit and the award ceremony that took place later in the day. The BBC is also preparing a documentary on ORS. Later in the afternoon, at the International Conference Center at Dhaka, ICDDR,B, in conjunction with Bangladesh's Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, celebrated 25 Years of ORS. In a brief ceremony, awards were presented to the Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee (BRAC), the government of Bangladesh, UNICEF, the United Nations Development Fund, USAID and the World Health Organization in recognition of their contributions to ORS and international health and population research. The Prime Minister and heads of UN agencies appreciated the important role of ICDDR,B at a time when global resources for health research seem to be shrinking. The ceremony and celebrations may motivate campaigns to fully realize the potential of ORS/ORT, not only in developing countries, but also in developed countries where it can significantly reduce burgeoning health care costs. These events could also draw attention to the cost-effectiveness of investments in international health and population research. ORS remains a clear reminder of the importance and benefits of international health research. Effective research results in better, cheaper, and more appropriate health programs. The World Bank's 1993 World Development Report stated that investments in health research and development have yielded high returns in better health.
