Polio eradication to be reviewed in August.
The International Commission for the Certification of Polio Eradication (ICCPE) met in Washington, D.C., on August 22, 1994. At that time, national commissions presented their findings, after reviewing surveillance data for their respective countries. The ICCPE meetings were chaired by Nobel laureate Dr. Frederick Robbins. The aim was to make a determination on whether the wild poliovirus had been interrupted in the Americas. The cost of maintaining effective control is high when there are few or no cases of polio. The last confirmed cases of wild, indigenous polio appeared to be in August, 1991; however, reports from the surveillance system revealed that about 2000 cases appeared between 1991-93 in the Americas, excluding the USA and Canada. Between 1992-93, there were 4310 cases reported, of which 8.8% were classified as probable. Cases are reviewed and determined to be confirmed, compatible with poliomyelitis probable, VAPP, or discarded. Most cases are discarded. The problem is that polio can have subclinical cases, which must be clinically tested in the laboratory for confirmation of acute flaccid paralysis (AFP). Mathematical models have suggested that after 3-4 years the likelihood of an outbreak is almost nil; the virus would appear in an outbreak among susceptibles within 6 months. This critical examination in the Americas will be used worldwide, and stringent requirements will be in effect. Of the reported AFP cases between 1991 and 1994, 50-60% have been identified as due to Guillain Barre's syndrome, about 2% each for tumors and transverse myelitis, and about 33% alternative illnesses. Laboratory tests of stools must be taken two times within 14 days of the onset of paralysis in 80% of the reported cases of AFP. Compliance has been difficult, but progress has been made: an increase in compliance from 53% in 1991 to 72% of cases in 1993. The Pan American Health Organization's Polio Eradication Surveillance System requires information on the presence of the following symptoms: fever at onset of paralysis, type of paralysis progression, proximal and/or distal paralysis, days of paralysis installation, atrophy, presence of sequelae 60 days after onset, and final diagnosis. In the first quarter of 1994, 95% of clinical reports included information on at least 4 of the 7 symptoms, and 61% were complete. There are still periodic world outbreaks of AFP, so surveillance must be maintained.
