Here comes the roving pregnancy monitors.
The Safe Motherhood Initiative in Uganda set up a pregnancy monitoring system with the following objectives: to promote safe motherhood in the community; to provide basic information and counselling on health and family planning to women; to maintain records on selected pregnancy-related indicators; to identify pregnant women at risk and refer them to the health units; and to increase availability of health care services. The national maternal mortality rate is 500 deaths per 100,000 live births. This could be reduced by lowering the current fertility rate of about 7.4; by spacing children at least 2 years apart, by antenatal and postnatal care, by assisted delivery by trained people, and by proper nutrition during childhood and pregnancy. The pregnancy monitors were women chosen by the communities with basic literacy and not under the age of 25. A total of 217 pregnancy monitors were trained at 3-day training workshops in 8 districts. A training curriculum had been developed by the Safe Motherhood Coordinating Board in 1991 with these topics: antenatal care, maintaining good health during pregnancy, high risk factors and complications during pregnancy, complications of delivery, postnatal care, breast-feeding, family planning, sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) and AIDS, and cultural practices affecting the health of women. For 1992, over 2300 pregnancy monitor reporting forms from 5 districts were analyzed. Almost 75% of women had at least 1 risk factor (multiparity was most common, reported in 36%). 93% of women received some antenatal care. Anaemia was the most commonly reported complication, reported in 33% of pregnancies. STD symptoms and inadequate weight gain were reported in 11% and 10% of cases, respectively. 40% of women delivered at home, compared to 50% who delivered in a health facility. 20 maternal deaths were reported out of 2294 live births, which implies a maternal mortality rate of 830 per 100,000 live births. In late 1992, Safe Motherhood Board members set out to gather information on the services rendered by pregnancy monitors.
