A critical mass of AIDS research.
To combat the spread of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in Africa, IDRC is supporting collaborative research of the University of Manitoba and the University of Nairobi which targets prostitutes, children, and long-distance truck drivers. The team of 70 researchers (African, Canadian, and European) is led by Dr. J.O. Ndinya-Achola (University of Nairobi) and Dr. Frank Plummer (University of Manitoba). A study of 1700 Nairobi sex workers has shown that 95% are infected with HIV or have acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS); the remaining 5% of the cohort have not acquired the disease, even though their behavior appears to be the same. Plummer believes their apparent resistance to the disease may hold the answer for a vaccine or a cure. Another area of research concerns the transmission of HIV in breast milk. In a study of 500 children whose mothers were HIV-positive, 47% were infected. Of these, 50% had acquired the virus through breast feeding, a common and necessary practice in Africa because it nourishes the child and prevents disease. The researchers believe that a 3-6 month period of breast feeding, rather than 2 years, among HIV-positive mothers will lower the rate of transmission to infants while providing immunity to other diseases. Dr. J.J. Bwayo leads the research effort which focuses on truck drivers. 30% of 800 tested drivers were positive for HIV; the percentage increases approximately 4% annually. 350 drivers were interviewed in 1990; in spite of adequate knowledge concerning AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases, 80% reported having unprotected sex with a prostitute within the last year, and 25% reported weekly sex with sex workers. Only 10% reported they had ever used a condom. Dr. Bwayo's group has established a roadside clinic near a police checkpoint. The truck drivers are offered HIV tests, condoms, education, and counseling while they wait for police to check their rigs. Plummer believes this mobile population is important in the spread of HIV geographically.
